XPath extension functions
=========================

This document describes how to deal with XPath extension
functions. This documentation is preliminary as the API is still in
flux.

An extension function is defined in Python. In order to use it in
XPath, it needs to have a name by which it can be called in XPath, and
an optional namespace URI.

As the first argument a function will always receive the
XPathEvaluator object that is currently in the process of evaluating
the XPath expression.

First, let's create a simple XPath function::

  >>> def foo(evaluator, a):
  ...    return "Hello %s" % a

Now we need to register it as part of an extension. An extension is a
simple dictionary with tuple keys and function values. The tuple keys
are composed of a namespace URI (or `None`), and the name of the
function in XPath. We'll use the namespace URI `None` for now, to
indicate the function isn't in any particular namespace::

  >>> extension = { (None, 'foo') : foo }

Now we're going to create an XPath evaluator. To do that, we first need a
document that the evaluator is evaluating against::

  >>> from lxml import etree
  >>> from StringIO import StringIO
  >>> f = StringIO('<a/>')
  >>> doc = etree.parse(f)

The XPathEvaluator takes the document, an optional dictionary of
namespace prefix to namespace URI mappings, and an optional list of
extensions. We'll just pass in extensions for now::

  >>> e = etree.XPathEvaluator(doc, extensions=[extension])

Now we can use the evaluator to make XPath queries against the document::

  >>> r = e.evaluate('/a')
  >>> r[0].tag
  'a'

This is not using the extension function. We'll try a very simple
XPath query that does now. It doesn't really use the document at all::

  >>> e.evaluate("foo('world')")
  'Hello world'

Let's create a slightly more complicated extension now, one that uses
a namespaced function. We'll just reuse the function foo, but register
it under a different name, and a namespace::

  >>> extension2 = { ('http://codespeak.net/ns/test', 'different-name') : foo }
 
Now let's set up an evaluator to use it. We'll also register our
original extension. As we want to use a namespace function, we first
need to register a namespace prefix we can use in the XPath
expression, so that we can access the namespace. This just like when
you'd want to access a namespaced XML element or attribute::

  >>> e = etree.XPathEvaluator(doc, 
  ...    namespaces={'test': 'http://codespeak.net/ns/test'},
  ...    extensions=[extension, extension2])

Since we registered the original extension too for this evaluator, our
`foo` extension function still works::

  >>> e.evaluate("foo('world')")
  'Hello world'

But now, we also have access to our namespaced `different-name`
extension function::

  >>> e.evaluate("test:different-name('there')")
  'Hello there'
